# Chapter 4
This chapter looks at specifying the forces and moments that act on the body. Building on the content from chapter 3, this enables modelling how the vehicle interacts with the world.

## Forces and moments
External forces:
* Gravitational
* Aerodynamic
* Propulsion

Moments:
* Aerodynamic 
* Propulsion

$f_g^b=R_v^b(0;0;mg)$

The force of gravity is in the vehicle frame. This transforms it into the body frame. It has to be in the body frame because the equations of motion are expressed in the body frame.

### Lift
Lift is generated by pressure on the wing, and is related to the speed of air going over the wing, and by extension, the angle of attack. 

Up to the critical AoA, the lift increases with an increase in AoA, but after that, the wing stalls, flow separation occurs, and the lift force turns into drag force. 

$F_{lift}=\frac{1}{2}\rho v_a^2SC_l$

$F_{drag}=\frac{1}{2}\rho v_a^2SC_d$

($S$ is the area of the wing)

$C_l$ and $C_d$ both change as a function of $\alpha$.

Moment of air over the wing:

$m=\frac{1}{2}\rho v_a^2ScC_m$

where $S$ is the wing area and $c$ is the chord area.

### Control surfaces
Control surfaces exert roll rates in different axes. These all correlate to a positive RH rotation about the respective axis.


**For a conventional aircraft:**

$+\delta_a$ is deflection of the ailerons, right aileron up, left aileron down.

$+\delta_e$ is deflection of the elevator, positive down.

$+\delta_r$ is deflection of the rudder, positive left.

**For a V tail aircraft:**
Ailerons are the same as a conventional aircraft.
$+\delta_{rl}$ is deflection of the left elevon, positive outward.
$+\delta_{rr}$ is deflection of the right elevon, positive outward.

$(\delta_e; \delta_r) = \frac{1}{2}(1 1; 1 -1)(\delta_{rr};\delta_{rl})$

**For a flying wing:**
$+\delta_{el}$ is deflection of the left elevon, positive down.
$+\delta_{er}$ is deflection of the right elevon, positive down.

$(\delta_e; \delta_a) = \frac{1}{2}(1 1; 1 -1)(\delta_{er};\delta_{el})$

*Note: The flying wing does not have a rudder, nor do the elevons exert a rudder moment. Instead, yaw movement is accomplished by yaw-roll coupling.* 

## Aircraft dynamics
Aircraft dynamics are typically split across latitudinal and longitudinal groups.

Lateral dynamics deals with movement in the planar X, Y world (primarily roll and yaw). Longitudinal dynamics deal with movement in altitude (primarily pitch).
### Longitudinal forces
Longitudinal forces act in the $ik$ plane, also known as the pitch frame. They are influenced by angle of attack, pitch rate, and elevator deflection. 

$Cl$, $Cd$, and $Cm$ are all functions of $\alpha$, $q$ (pitch moment), and $\delta_e$ (elevator deflection).

The coefficients can then be broken out by their parameters, i.e.:
$F_lift=\frac{1}{2}\rho v_a^2 S [C_{L0}+\frac{\delta C_l}{\delta \alpha} \alpha + \frac {\delta C_l}{\delta_q}q+\frac{\delta C_l}{\delta_{\delta_e}}\delta_e]$

which works out to

$F_lift=\frac{1}{2}\rho v_a^2 S [C_{L0}+C_{l\alpha} \alpha + C_{lq}\frac{c}{2V_a}q+C_{l\delta_e}\delta_e]$

Side note: $C_{Lq}=\frac{\delta C_l}{\delta \frac{qc}{2V_a}}$

This approach is a linear aerodynamic model. It's sufficient for small angles of attack in small scale UAVs. For larger, more complex platforms, nonlinear dynamics must be used. 

The simplest linear lift and drag models are:

$C_L(\alpha)=C_L0+C_{L_\alpha}\alpha$

$C_D(\alpha)=C_D0+C_{D_\alpha}\alpha$

In a nonlinear model, we blend a linear model and a flate plate model with a blending function.

### Nonlinear model
$C_{L_{\alpha}}$ is teh stability derivative, and is approximated by:

$\frac{\pi AR}{1+\sqrt{a+(AR/2)^2}}$

Where $AR=b^2/S$ is the wing aspect ration, $b$ is the wingspan, and $S$ is the wing area.

The stability derivative shows if the vehicle is stable or unstable, or whether it will return to its trim state after being perturbed. 

### Drag
Drag is composed of parasitic drag (profile drag of the aircraft, surfaces, fuselage, etc) and induced drag (drag due to lift).

## Control derivatives
Some control derivatives are cross-control derivatives, meaning that they influence more than one axis simulataneously. This includes: $C_{l_{\delta r}}$ and $C_{n_{\delta a}}$

## Propeller effects
The propeller exerts a force and a moment:

$f^b=(T_p;0;0)$

$m^b=(Q_p;0;0)$

These both depend on the air density, propeller speed, propeller diameter, aerodynamic coefficients, and advance ratio.

## Wind modelling
Wind modelling uses a white nose source fed through a transfer function to build a wind gust model. 
This is the Dryden gust model.